Rework hlsl-vector-type into two specs (#361)
microsoft/hlsl-specs: proposals/0026-hlsl-long-vector-type.md

<!-- {% raw %} -->

# HLSL Long Vectors

* Proposal: [0026-HLSL-Vectors](0026-hlsl-vector-type.md)
* Author(s): [Anupama Chandrasekhar](https://github.com/anupamachandra), [Greg Roth](https://github.com/pow2clk)
* Sponsor: [Greg Roth](https://github.com/pow2clk)
* Status: **Under Consideration**

## Introduction

> HLSL has always supported vectors of as many as four elements of different element types (int3, float4, etc.).

Reviewer: Always doesn't indicate enough that this is past behavior. and `as many as` just read awkward to me. Also replaced the repeat of the word element with `scalar`.
```suggestion
HLSL has traditionally supported vectors with up to four elements of different scalar types (int3, float4, etc.).
```

Author: This comment went to the wrong suggestion. Oops

> These are useful in a traditional graphics context for representation and manipulation of

Reviewer: If you use the suggestion in line 12 remove the word `traditional` in line 13.

 geometry and color information.
The evolution of HLSL as a more general purpose language targeting Graphics and Compute
 greatly benefit from longer vectors to fully represent these operations rather than to try to
 break them down into smaller constituent vectors.

> This feature adds the ability to declare and use native HLSL vectors longer than four elements.

Reviewer: I don't understand the distinction between declaration and use.  I think this line should just be simplified to add native support like so:
```suggestion
This feature introduces native support for vectors exceeding four elements.
```

Author: Declaration without use in intrinsics isn't terribly useful of course, but there is a distinction between them. I drew the distinction because both declaration and use are limited in certain ways. The rest of the spec addresses them individually and this set that up. 

I don't feel too strongly about it for the introduction though.

Reviewer 2: It would be really odd to have the language allow you to declare something that you then can't use. I might instead phrase this something like:

> This feature allows declaring objects of vector type with more than four elements, and defines how those objects may be used.

This proposal adds support for long vectors of length greater than 4 by
 allowing `N` to be greater than 4 where previously such a declaration would produce an error.

The default behavior of HLSL vectors is preserved for backward compatibility, meaning, skipping the last parameter `N`
defaults to 4-component vectors and the use `vector name;` declares a 4-component float vector, etc. More examples
[here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3dhlsl/dx-graphics-hlsl-vector).
Declarations of long vectors require the use of the template declaration.
Unlike vector sizes between 1 and 4, no shorthand declarations that concatenate
 the element type and number of elements (e.g. float2, double4) are allowed for long vectors.

The new vectors will be supported in all shader stages including Node shaders. There are no control flow or wave
uniformity requirements, but implementations may specify best practices in certain uses for optimal performance.

Long vectors are not permitted in:

* Resource types other than ByteAddressBuffer or StructuredBuffer.
* Any element of the shader's signature including entry function parameters and return types.

> * Cbuffers or tbuffers.

Reviewer 3: Can I construct a long vector from an array stored in a cbuffer?

Reviewer 2: You should be able to construct a long vector from an array regardless of where the array is stored. HLSL's aggregate initialization rules would allow this so it seems like we shouldn't special case long vectors.

* Math: abs, ceil, clamp, exp, exp2, floor, fma, fmod, frac, frexp, ldexp, lerp, log, log10, log2, mad, max, min, pow, rcp, round, rsqrt, sign, smoothstep, sqrt, step, trunc
* Float Ops: f16tof32, f32tof16, isfinite, isinf, isnan, modf, saturate
* Bitwise Ops: reversebits, countbits, firstbithigh, firstbitlow
* Logic Ops: and, or, select
* Reductions: all, any, clamp, dot
* Quad Ops: ddx, ddx_coarse, ddx_fine, ddy, ddy_coarse, ddy_fine, fwidth, QuadReadLaneAt, QuadReadLaneAcrossX, QuadReadLaneAcrossY, QuadReadLaneAcrossDiagonal
* Wave Ops: WaveActiveBitAnd, WaveActiveBitOr, WaveActiveBitXor, WaveActiveProduct, WaveActiveSum, WaveActiveMin, WaveActiveMax, WaveMultiPrefixBitAnd, WaveMultiPrefixBitOr, WaveMultiPrefixBitXor, WaveMultiPrefixProduct, WaveMultiPrefixSum, WavePrefixSum, WavePrefixProduct, WaveReadLaneAt, WaveReadLaneFirst
* Wave Reductions: WaveActiveAllEqual, WaveMatch

#### Native vector intrinsics

Of the above list, the following will produce the appropriate unary, binary, or tertiary
 DXIL intrinsic that take native vector parameters:

* fma
* exp
* log
* tanh
* atan
* min
* max
* clamp
* step

#### Disallowed vector intrinsics

> * Only applicable to for shorter vectors: AddUint64, asdouble, asfloat, asfloat16, asint, asint16, asuint, asuint16, D3DCOLORtoUBYTE4, cross, distance, dst, faceforward, length, normalize, reflect, refract, NonUniformResourceIndex

Reviewer 2: What is the reasoning for disallowing the conversion functions?

Author: Sorry I didn't address this. Some of these comments didn't show up in my review of the files. I think you're referring to the as<Something> functions? There is some variability there. Some of them map to a simple bitcast. Those are fine. Some of them take multiple parameters representing low and hi bits that don't map as neatly.

* Q: Usage restrictions
  * A: Long vectors may not form part of the shader signature.
       There are many restrictions on signature elements including bit fields that determine if they are fully written.
       By definition, these involve more interfaces that would require additional changes and testing.
* Q: Does this have implications for existing HLSL source code compatibility?
  * A: Existing HLSL code that makes no use of long vectors will have no semantic changes.
* Q: Should this change the default N = 4 for vectors?
  * A: No. While the default size of 4 is less intuitive in a world of larger vectors, existing code depends on this default, so it remains unchanged.
* Q: How will SPIR-V be supported?
  * A: TBD
* Q: should swizzle accessors be allowed for long vectors?
  * A: No. It doesn't make sense since they can't be used to access all elements
       and there's no way to create enough swizzle members to accommodate the longest allowed vector.
* Q: How should scalar groupshared arrays be loaded/stored into/out of long vectors.
  * A: After some consideration, we opted not to include explicit Load/Store operations for this function.

>        There are at least a couple ways this could be resolved, and the preferred solution is outside the scope.

Reviewer 3: Does this mean that long vectors can marked as groupshared and it just works? Wondering if this Q&A belongs in the DXIL spec?

Reviewer 3: Maybe I'm missing the context or the significance of not including explicit Load/Store operations here, or just plain misunderstanding this Q/A altogether.  The "preferred solution is outside the scope" seems to suggest that there's not going to be a way to use long vectors in groupshared.

Reviewer 3: Ok. I think that this Q/A is a bit confusing as written now.  If I understand correctly, it's saying that we're not going to tackle solving the problem of people wanting buffer-like access to groupshared memory. So in the same way that we don't support explicit Load/Store operations for other data types, we're not going to add new ones for this.  Marking a long vector as groupshared is still expected to work.

Author: What you've said is accurate, so I don't know why you think it's confusing. I'm happy to take another run at it, but I think it's succinct and sufficient. It doesn't go into detail because I don't think we need to. It's a feature for another day. I could create an issue for it that could contain all the details if that would help.

Reviewer 3: I was only able to reach the understanding by this conversation.

Author: I don't think it's useful to go into detail about something that someone wanted to tack onto this spec, but isn't related to it. Perhaps the best approach is to just remove it.

This proposal adds support for long vectors of length greater than 4 by
 allowing `N` to be greater than 4 where previously such a declaration would produce an error.

The default behavior of HLSL vectors is preserved for backward compatibility, meaning, skipping the last parameter `N`
defaults to 4-component vectors and the use `vector name;` declares a 4-component float vector, etc. More examples
[here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3dhlsl/dx-graphics-hlsl-vector).
Declarations of long vectors require the use of the template declaration.
Unlike vector sizes between 1 and 4, no shorthand declarations that concatenate
 the element type and number of elements (e.g. float2, double4) are allowed for long vectors.

The new vectors will be supported in all shader stages including Node shaders. There are no control flow or wave
uniformity requirements, but implementations may specify best practices in certain uses for optimal performance.

Long vectors can be:

* Elements of arrays, structs, StructuredBuffers, and ByteAddressBuffers.

> * Parameters and return types of non-etry functions.

Reviewer 4: nit: typo
```suggestion
* Parameters and return types of non-entry functions.
```

`N` is the number of components and must be an integer between 1 and 4 inclusive.
See the vector definition [documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3dhlsl/dx-graphics-hlsl-vector) for more details.
This proposal adds support for long vectors of length greater than 4 by
 allowing `N` to be greater than 4 where previously such a declaration would produce an error.

The default behavior of HLSL vectors is preserved for backward compatibility, meaning, skipping the last parameter `N`
defaults to 4-component vectors and the use `vector name;` declares a 4-component float vector, etc. More examples
[here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3dhlsl/dx-graphics-hlsl-vector).
Declarations of long vectors require the use of the template declaration.
Unlike vector sizes between 1 and 4, no shorthand declarations that concatenate
 the element type and number of elements (e.g. float2, double4) are allowed for long vectors.

#### Allowed Usage

The new vectors will be supported in all shader stages including Node shaders. There are no control flow or wave

> uniformity requirements, but implementations may specify best practices in certain uses for optimal performance.

Reviewer 5: Is this line needed for the long vector spec? It's probably implicitly assumed?

Author: Which part do you take to be implicitly assumed? I don't think support across all shader stages should be assumed. The control/wave uniformity requirements touch more on the followups and could probably be removed. I'm inclined to leave the implementations encouraging best practices language as some platforms might end up scalarizing vector operations at some point or another which won't lead to the best performance.

# HLSL Long Vectors

* Proposal: [0026-HLSL-Vectors](0026-hlsl-vector-type.md)
* Author(s): [Anupama Chandrasekhar](https://github.com/anupamachandra), [Greg Roth](https://github.com/pow2clk)
* Sponsor: [Greg Roth](https://github.com/pow2clk)
* Status: **Under Consideration**

## Introduction

HLSL has previously supported vectors of as many as four elements (int3, float4, etc.).
These are useful in a traditional graphics context for representation and manipulation of
 geometry and color information.
The evolution of HLSL as a more general purpose language targeting Graphics and Compute
 greatly benefit from longer vectors to fully represent these operations rather than to try to
 break them down into smaller constituent vectors.
This feature adds the ability to load, store, and perform elementwise operations on HLSL
 vectors longer than four elements.

## Motivation

The adoption of machine learning techniques expressed as vector-matrix operations
 require larger vector sizes to be representable in HLSL.
To take advantage of specialized hardware that can accelerate longer vector operations,
 these vectors need to be preserved in the exchange format as well.

## Proposed solution

> Enable vectors of length between 4 and 128 inclusive in HLSL using existing template-based vector declarations.

Reviewer 6: if the range is inclusive, then that 4 should be 5.

Author: Done.

> Enable vectors of length between 5 and 128 inclusive in HLSL using existing template-based vector declarations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Enable vectors of length between 5 and 1024 inclusive in HLSL using existing template-based vector declarations.
```

Author: Done

Such vectors will hereafter be referred to as "long vectors".
These will be supported for all elementwise intrinsics that take variable-length vector parameters.
For certain operations, these vectors will be represented as native vectors using
 [Dxil vectors](NNNN-dxil-vectors.md) and equivalent SPIR-V representations.

## Detailed design

### HLSL vectors

Currently HLSL allows declaring vectors using a templated representation:

```hlsl
vector<T, N> name;
```

`T` is any [scalar](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3dhlsl/dx-graphics-hlsl-scalar) type.
`N` is the number of components and must be an integer between 1 and 4 inclusive.
See the vector definition [documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3dhlsl/dx-graphics-hlsl-vector) for more details.
This proposal adds support for long vectors of length greater than 4 by
 allowing `N` to be greater than 4 where previously such a declaration would produce an error.

> 

Reviewer 6: Somewhat related to what @tex3d asked, but more broad:  the spec needs to say how N can be written.
* Can it be `N` where earlier there is a declaration `const uint N = 15;`
* Can it be `N` where `N` is the parameter to a function, and the vector type declaration is  inside the function.

I guess it has to be statically computed.  (I'm not sure what the HLSL term for it.)

The default behavior of HLSL vectors is preserved for backward compatibility, meaning, skipping the last parameter `N`
defaults to 4-component vectors and the use `vector name;` declares a 4-component float vector, etc. More examples
[here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3dhlsl/dx-graphics-hlsl-vector).
Declarations of long vectors require the use of the template declaration.
Unlike vector sizes between 1 and 4, no shorthand declarations that concatenate
 the element type and number of elements (e.g. float2, double4) are allowed for long vectors.

#### Allowed Usage

The new vectors will be supported in all shader stages including Node shaders.

Long vectors can be:

* Elements of arrays, structs, StructuredBuffers, and ByteAddressBuffers.
* Parameters and return types of non-entry functions.
* Stored in groupshared memory.
* Static global variables.

> 

Reviewer 6: I assume the type of a local (function scoped) variable can have long vector type.  That's not mentioned. The examples below show cases like these.

Long vectors are not permitted in:

* Resource types other than ByteAddressBuffer or StructuredBuffer.
* Any part of the shader's signature including entry function parameters and return types or
  user-defined struct parameters.
* Cbuffers or tbuffers.
* A ray tracing `Parameter`, `Attributes`, or `Payload` parameter structures.
* A work graph record.

While this describes where long vecgtors can be used and later sections will describe how,
implementations may specify best practices in certain uses for optimal performance.

#### Constructing vectors

HLSL vectors can be constructed through initializer lists, constructor syntax initialization, or by assignment.
Vectors can be initialized and assigned from various casting operations including scalars and arrays.

> Long vectors will maintain equivalent casting abilities.

Reviewer 5: It would be nice to have a way to initialize all elements of the vector with one value.

Examples:

```hlsl

> vector<uint, 5> InitList = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};

Reviewer 6: What happens if not all elements are listed explicitly.  Are the rest zero-initialized?

vector<uint, 6> Construct = vector<uint, 6>(6, 7, 8, 9, 0, 0);
uint4 initval = {0, 0, 0, 0};
vector<uint, 8> VecVec = {uint2(coord.xy), vecB};
vector<uint, 6> Assigned = vecB;
float arr[5];
vector<float, 5> CastArr = (vector<float, 5>)arr;
vector<float, 6> ArrScal = {arr, 7.9};
vector<float, 10> ArrArr = {arr, arr};
vector<float, 15> Scal = 4.2;
```

#### Vectors in Raw Buffers

N-element vectors are loaded and stored from ByteAddressBuffers using the templated load and store methods
with a vector type of the required size as the template parameter and byte offset parameters.

```hlsl
RWByteAddressBuffer myBuffer;

vector<T, N> val = myBuffer.Load< vector<T, N> >(StartOffsetInBytes); 
myBuffer.Store< vector<T, N> >(StartoffsetInBytes + 100, val);

```

StructuredBuffers with N-element vectors are declared using the template syntax
 with a long vector type as the template parameter.
N-element vectors are loaded and stored from ByteAddressBuffers using the templated load and store methods
with the element index parameters.

```hlsl

> RWStructuredBuffer< vector<T, N> > myBuffer;

Reviewer 6: Is the space between `> >` necessary, as per C++03 style parsing?  Might be good to call out.
I hope no space is required.

Reviewer 2: HLSL 2021 templates are C++98/03-era, so the space is required.

* Float Ops: f16tof32, f32tof16, isfinite, isinf, isnan, modf, saturate
* Bitwise Ops: reversebits, countbits, firstbithigh, firstbitlow
* Logic Ops: and, or, select
* Reductions: all, any, clamp, dot
* Quad Ops: ddx, ddx_coarse, ddx_fine, ddy, ddy_coarse, ddy_fine, fwidth, QuadReadLaneAt, QuadReadLaneAcrossX, QuadReadLaneAcrossY, QuadReadLaneAcrossDiagonal
* Wave Ops: WaveActiveBitAnd, WaveActiveBitOr, WaveActiveBitXor, WaveActiveProduct, WaveActiveSum, WaveActiveMin, WaveActiveMax, WaveMultiPrefixBitAnd, WaveMultiPrefixBitOr, WaveMultiPrefixBitXor, WaveMultiPrefixProduct, WaveMultiPrefixSum, WavePrefixSum, WavePrefixProduct, WaveReadLaneAt, WaveReadLaneFirst
* Wave Reductions: WaveActiveAllEqual, WaveMatch
* Type Conversions: asdouble, asfloat, asfloat16, asint, asint16, asuint, asuint16

#### Disallowed vector intrinsics

* Only applicable to shorter vectors: AddUint64, D3DCOLORtoUBYTE4, cross, distance, dst, faceforward, length, normalize, reflect, refract, NonUniformResourceIndex
* Only useful for disallowed variables: EvaluateAttributeAtSample, EvaluateAttributeCentroid, EvaluateAttributeSnapped, GetAttributeAtVertex

### Interchange Format Additions

> Long vectors can be represented in DXIL, SPIR-V or other interchange formats as scalarized elements or native vectors.

Reviewer 6: This section should be informative.

A good SPIR-V representation could be as arrays of elements. So it's still a single SSA value.

the testing burden saved may not have been substantial.
Since these vectors are to be added eventually anyway, the testing serves multiple purposes.
It makes sense to not introduce a new datatype but use HLSL vectors,
even if the initial implementation only exposes partial functionality.

The restrictions outlined in [Allowed Usage](allowed-usage) were chosen because they weren't
 needed for the targeted applications, but are not inherently impossible.
They omitted out of unclear utility and to simplify the design.
There's nothing about those use cases that is inherently incompatible with long vectors
 and future work might consider relaxing those restrictions.

Swizzle operations were not supported because they are limited to the first four elements.
The names of the accessors (xyzw or rgba) are named according to the expected content of
 those vectors in a graphics context.
Since that intretation does not apply to longer vectors, it could be confusing.
The subscript access is flexible and generic and makes other accessors redundant.

## Open Issues

* Q: Is there a limit on the Number of Components in a vector?

>   * A: 128. It's big enough for some known uses.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * A: 1024. It's big enough for some known uses.
```

Author: Done

Unlike vector sizes between 1 and 4, no shorthand declarations that concatenate
 the element type and number of elements (e.g. float2, double4) are allowed for long vectors.

The new vectors will be supported in all shader stages including Node shaders. There are no control flow or wave
uniformity requirements, but implementations may specify best practices in certain uses for optimal performance.

Long vectors are not permitted in:

* Resource types other than ByteAddressBuffer or StructuredBuffer.
* Any element of the shader's signature including entry function parameters and return types.
* Cbuffers or tbuffers.

#### Constructing vectors

HLSL vectors can be constructed through initializer lists, constructor syntax initialization, or by assignment.

Examples:

``` hlsl
vector<uint, 5> vecA = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
vector<uint, 6> vecB = vector<uint, 6>(6, 7, 8, 9, 0, 0);
uint4 initval = {0, 0, 0, 0};
vector<uint, 8> vecC = {uint2(coord.xy), vecB};
vector<uint, 6> vecD = vecB;
```

#### Vectors in Raw Buffers

N-element vectors are loaded and stored from ByteAddressBuffers using the templated load and store methods

> with a vector type of the required size as the template parameter and byte offset parameters.

Reviewer 6: You could say that a long vector <T,N> has the same alignment requirements as an array of N elements of type T.
Except that may be different from vector<float,4> which might have 16byte alignment.  With scalar alignment they would be the same. (Sorry, I don't remember if modern HLSL assumes scalar alignment for vectors.)

> with a vector type of the required size as the template parameter and byte offset parameters.

Author: Tex and I will discuss this and I'll update the spec accordingly.

> with a vector type of the required size as the template parameter and byte offset parameters.

Reviewer 7: Alignment for vectors in HLSL is purely based on the alignment of the scalar element type.  Constant buffer layout ("legacy") is a special case where a vector that would cross a 16-byte aligned boundary is started at the next 16-byte aligned location instead.

Array elements have the same natural alignment based on scalar element type as vectors.  However, they also have a special rule for constant buffer layout ("legacy") where each array element must start at the beginning of a 16-byte aligned boundary.  There are also special rules for signature inputs/outputs for arrays, but these can't be described by a concept of alignment.

The "legacy" constant layout rules cannot be described by the concept of type alignments.

Changing the natural alignment rules for a vector depending on whether it has > 4 elements seems weird.

* Math: abs, ceil, clamp, exp, exp2, floor, fma, fmod, frac, frexp, ldexp, lerp, log, log10, log2, mad, max, min, pow, rcp, round, rsqrt, sign, smoothstep, sqrt, step, trunc
* Float Ops: f16tof32, f32tof16, isfinite, isinf, isnan, modf, saturate
* Bitwise Ops: reversebits, countbits, firstbithigh, firstbitlow
* Logic Ops: and, or, select
* Reductions: all, any, clamp, dot
* Quad Ops: ddx, ddx_coarse, ddx_fine, ddy, ddy_coarse, ddy_fine, fwidth, QuadReadLaneAt, QuadReadLaneAcrossX, QuadReadLaneAcrossY, QuadReadLaneAcrossDiagonal
* Wave Ops: WaveActiveBitAnd, WaveActiveBitOr, WaveActiveBitXor, WaveActiveProduct, WaveActiveSum, WaveActiveMin, WaveActiveMax, WaveMultiPrefixBitAnd, WaveMultiPrefixBitOr, WaveMultiPrefixBitXor, WaveMultiPrefixProduct, WaveMultiPrefixSum, WavePrefixSum, WavePrefixProduct, WaveReadLaneAt, WaveReadLaneFirst
* Wave Reductions: WaveActiveAllEqual, WaveMatch

#### Native vector intrinsics

Of the above list, the following will produce the appropriate unary, binary, or tertiary
 DXIL intrinsic that take native vector parameters:

* fma
* exp
* log
* tanh
* atan
* min
* max
* clamp
* step

#### Disallowed vector intrinsics

> * Only applicable to for shorter vectors: AddUint64, asdouble, asfloat, asfloat16, asint, asint16, asuint, asuint16, D3DCOLORtoUBYTE4, cross, distance, dst, faceforward, length, normalize, reflect, refract, NonUniformResourceIndex

Author: I don't know why these comments didn't show up in my pass of the file diff. As I mentioned above in comment https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/361#discussion_r1915504468, I agree some of these should be supported.

Unlike vector sizes between 1 and 4, no shorthand declarations that concatenate
 the element type and number of elements (e.g. float2, double4) are allowed for long vectors.

#### Allowed Usage

The new vectors will be supported in all shader stages including Node shaders. There are no control flow or wave
uniformity requirements, but implementations may specify best practices in certain uses for optimal performance.

Long vectors can be:

* Elements of arrays, structs, StructuredBuffers, and ByteAddressBuffers.
* Parameters and return types of non-entry functions.
* Stored in groupshared memory.

> * Static global varaibles.

Reviewer 3: typo

```suggestion
* Static global variables.
```

* Resource types other than ByteAddressBuffer or StructuredBuffer.
* Any part of the shader's signature including entry function parameters and return types.
* Cbuffers or tbuffers.
* A mesh/amplification `Payload` entry parameter structure.
* A ray tracing `Parameter`, `Attributes`, or `Payload` parameter structure.
* A work graph record.

#### Constructing vectors

HLSL vectors can be constructed through initializer lists, constructor syntax initialization, or by assignment.
Vectors can be initialized and assigned from various casting operations including scalars and arrays.
Long vectors will maintain equivalent casting abilities.

Examples:

```hlsl
vector<uint, 5> InitList = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
vector<uint, 6> Construct = vector<uint, 6>(6, 7, 8, 9, 0, 0);
uint4 initval = {0, 0, 0, 0};
vector<uint, 8> VecVec = {uint2(coord.xy), vecB};
vector<uint, 6> Assigned = vecB;
float arr[5];
vector<float, 5> CastArr = (vector<float, 5>)arr;
vector<float, 6> ArrScal = {arr, 7.9};
vector<float, 10> ArrArr = {arr, arr};
vector<float, 15> Scal = 4.2;
```

float4 main(uint size: S) : SV_Target {
   return (float4)arr;
vector<uint, 8> vecC = {uint2(coord.xy), vecB};

> 

Reviewer 3: This is outside the ` ``` ` so doesn't format correctly.  Also looks like the `main` function is missing a close brace.  Is the `vecC` part means to be inside the function?

Author: Left over margin notes. I've removed them.

#### Accessing elements of long vectors

Long vectors support the existing vector subscript operators `[]` to access the scalar element values.
They do not support any swizzle operations.

> Swizzle operations are limited to the first four elements and the accessors are named according to the graphics domain.

Reviewer 3: These two sentences seem contradictory now.  I think the original version was clearer - swizzle isn't supported, because of reasons.  Is the intent to change this to say that they're supported now for just the first four elements?

Author: I don't think they are. The first says that long vectors don't support swizzle operations. The second describes what they are to try to explain why. I'm not sure the rationale needs to be here though. I can put it in alternatives considered.

* Ray tracing `Attributes` parameter structures used in `ReportHit` and `closesthit` entry functions.

Errors should also be produced when long vectors are used as parameters to intrinsics
 with vector parameters of variable length, but aren't permitted as listed in [Disallowed vector intrinsics](#disallowed-vector-intrinsics)
Attempting to use any swizzle member-style accessors on long vectors should produce an error.
Declaring vectors of length longer than 1024 should produce an error.

### Validation Changes

Validation should produce errors when a long vector is found in:

* The shader signature.
* A cbuffer/tbuffer.
* Work graph records.
* Mesh/amplification payload entry parameter structures.
* Ray tracing `Payload` parameter structures used in `TraceRay` and `anyhit`/`closesthit`/`miss` entry functions.
* Ray tracing `Parameter` parameter structures used in `CallShader` and `callable` entry functions.
* Ray tracing `Attributes` parameter structures used in `ReportHit` and `closesthit` entry functions.
* Metadata

Use of long vectors in unsupported intrinsics should produce validation errors.

### Device Capability

> Devices that support Shader Model 6.9 will be required to fully support this feature.

Reviewer 3: In the interchange format section above we have:

> Long vectors can be represented in DXIL, SPIR-V or other interchange formats as scalarized elements or native vectors.
Representation of native vectors in DXIL depends on [dxil vectors](NNNN-dxil-vectors.md).

This seems to imply that long vectors can be supported in existing shader models.  I think it's only native DXIL vectors feature that actually requires SM 6.9?

Author: That wasn't what I intended to imply with that statement, rather that implementations could choose either approach as we intend to do at least temporarily. However, it is true that this is possible. One of the major remaining questions is if we should.

Reviewer 3: Before I resolve this conversation: do we have something written down that is tracking this remaining question?

Author: I've created #371
